APPS-628 Document best practices, limitations and examples of WDL-based global workflows. (#262)
dnanexus/dxCompiler: doc/ExpertOptions.md

- [Debugging an applet](#debugging-an-applet)
  * [Getting WDL sources](#getting-wdl-sources)
- [Recompilation](#recompilation)

> - [Publishing global workflows](#publishing-global-workflows)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Publishing global workflows](#publishing-global-workflows)
  * [Recommendations] [#global-workflows-recommendations]
  * [Limitations] [#global-workflows-limitations]
```

- _TODO_ Developers should use simple types for input/output interfaces for global workflows for better platform experience.

- _TODO_ Specify runtime resources using memory, disk, cpu requirements (not hard-coded instance types) for better compatibility across runtime projects.

- _TODO_ Compile with `-instanceTypeSelection dynamic` for better compatibility across runtime projects, but expect longer runtime.

- _TODO_ The developer of a global WDL-based workflow should include a pointer to WDL git repo commit that the workflow is based on for informational purposes by updating the description of the global workflow if needed.

## Limitations

- _TODO_ What will not be cloned with the workflow

Review the dependencies to make sure they are accessible to authorized users of the workflow

- _TODO_ How to view the Markdown description until UI page works

I think the biggest UI issue is lack of an easy way to look at pretty markdown encoded in the description of the applets and workflows in UI or CLI.
I had to resort to this. Need to document this.

```
dx describe globalworkflow-<name>/<version> --json | jq -rc '.description | tostring'
```

> - _TODO_ Is there a correct way to reference an id of an applet that is part of a global workflow (exists in the global workflow's resource container) that will not stress the API server with a global search? Do we have to instruct the user here how to find the project id of the resource container first?

Author: Documentation question. Is there a correct way to reference an id of an applet that is part of a global workflow (exists in the global workflow's resource container) that will not stress the API server with a global search? Do we have to instruct the user here how to find the project id of the resource container first? @commandlinegirl @emiloslavsky @asimenos

Author: Actually, regarding dx describe applet-xxxx, I think I will only instruct the user to dx describe globalworkflow-<name>/<version> since the relevant part of the description for all tasks and subworkflows is aggregated there. They should be able to find the info they need without describing applets individually.

# Recompilation

Any significant WDL workflow is compiled into multiple DNAnexus applets and workflows. Naively, any modification to the WDL source would necessitate recompilation of all the constituent objects, which is expensive. To optimize this use case, all generated platform objects are checksumed. If a dx:object has not changed, it is not recompiled, and the existing version can be used. The checksum covers the WDL source code, the DNAnexus runtime specification, and any other attributes. There are two exceptions: the project name, and the folder. This allows moving WDL workflows in the folder hierarchy without recompilation.

# Publishing global workflows

> 

Reviewer 2: How about adding a short info on what global workflows are and when they are useful. You can also link to the official doc on global workflows: https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/workflows/version-and-publish-workflows#about-workflows-and-global-workflows

<!-- TODO supported version pending release w/ APPS-989 -->

> Publishing a dxCompiler WDL workflow as a global workflow is supported from dxCompiler >= `v2.8.0` and dxpy >= `v<supported version here>`

Reviewer 2: Please set more context before talking about versions of tools and examples (you can adjust if needed):

Creating a global workflow from WDL involves two steps: i. first a workflow is compiled in a project, similarly to any other WDL workflow, and then ii. this workflow is converted to a global workflow using `dx-toolkit`...

Example: compiling a WDL workflow for later use as a global workflow.
```
java -jar dxCompiler.jar compile <workflow name>.wdl -instanceTypeSelection dynamic
```

<!-- TODO edit example to use <project id>:<workflow id> once dxpy supports that -->
Example: publishing a global workflow from a compiled workflow. The global workflow's name will match the WDL workflow name. The global workflow's version must be set with `--version`, since a non-global workflow has no such property. If `--bill-to` is not specified, the publishing user's default billTo will be assumed.
```
dx build --globalworkflow --from <workflow id> --version <version> --bill-to <user-xxxx | org-yyyy>
dx publish globalworkflow-<workflow name>/<version>
```

Example: adding authorized users to a global workflow
```

> dx add users globalworkflow-<workflow name> <user-xxxx | org-yyyy | PUBLIC>

Reviewer 2: Please remove PUBLIC, this can only be done a DNAnexus user.

```

> See [Limitations](#limitations) below for more details on which parts of the workflow will be automatically included in the global workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [Limitations](#limitations) below for more details on which dependencies of the workflow will be automatically included in the global workflow.
```

## Recommendations

> Developers should not store any credentials (passwords, keys, etc.) in the source code of the global workflow, as authorized users will have permission to download and view any applets referenced in the global workflow.

Reviewer 2: For consistency with other parts of the documentation I'd use the "you" form instead of "developers", e.g. "You should not store any credentials..."

> Developers should not store any credentials (passwords, keys, etc.) in the source code of the global workflow, as authorized users will have permission to download and view any applets referenced in the global workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Developers should not store any credentials (passwords, keys, etc.) in the source code of the global workflow, as authorized users will have permission to download and view any applets and their data referenced in the global workflow.
```

Developers should use simple types for input/output interfaces for global workflows for better platform experience.

> For better portability across projects where the workflow will be run, developers should specify runtime resources using memory, disk, CPU requirements (not hard-coded instance types using the key `dx_instance_type`). Developers should compile WDL workflows with `-instanceTypeSelection dynamic`. Expect slightly longer runtimes due to the need to pick instance types at runtime, but this ensures the workflow will always use instance types that are supported for the project where it runs.

Reviewer 2: Please explain briefly what the suggested option does (this may also be made clearer by slightly rewriting the following sentences).

```suggestion
For better portability across projects where the workflow will be run, developers should specify runtime resources using memory, disk, CPU requirements (not hard-coded instance types using the key `dx_instance_type`). Developers should compile WDL workflows with `-instanceTypeSelection dynamic`. This option ..... Expect slightly longer runtimes due to the need to pick instance types at runtime, but this ensures the workflow will always use instance types that are supported for the project where it runs.
```

> For informational purposes, developers should include a reference to a git repo commit containing the original source code. They can add this to the "description" metadata field of the global workflow.

Reviewer 2: How about adding a link to the documentation where we explain metadata so the users can quickly see how to do it? Or adding an example/snippet here.

Author: To do: Add examples of how to update the WF metadata (title, summary, description, tags, categories) by API call after the global WF is published.

Note: it looks like it will have to be done that way, see discussion on ticket linked to testing ticket APPS-627.

Author: API examples are done.

## Limitations

Publishing a dxCompiler workflow as a global workflow is currently only supported for WDL.

The global workflow will currently only support a single region (matching the region in which the original workflow was compiled).

Some dependencies of the original workflow will be automatically included in the global workflow, i.e. they will be cloned into the global workflow's resource container and authorized users of the global workflow will not require additional permissions. These include
- Applets and sub-workflows that were part of the original workflow

> - Native applets referenced by the workflow

Reviewer 2: How are these applets different than applets mentioned in the first point?

Author: Edited -- this refers to `dxni` applets, and below, `dxni` apps.

- Docker images that are stored as platform files

Some dependencies of the original workflow will not be automatically included in the global workflow, i.e. the user may need additional permissions to access them. These include

> - Native apps referenced by the workflow (user needs permission to use the apps)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Native apps referenced by the workflow (user needs permission to use the apps. In order to give access to the app to the specific user or org you can run `dx add users <app> <user or org>)
```

> - Files referenced by file paths in workflow inputs or body (user needs access to the files)

Reviewer 2: Files referenced by IDs as well

```suggestion
- Files referenced by file paths or IDs in workflow inputs or body (user needs access to the files)
```

- Credentials file for a private Docker registry (user needs access to the file)
- Docker images in external registries, or dynamically specified at runtime (these will be pulled at runtime)

> - Hard-coded `dx_instance_type` (runtime project needs to support the instance type; using numeric resource requirements is preferred)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Hard-coded `dx_instance_type` (runtime project needs to support the instance type; using numeric resource requirements, as mentioned in the Recommendations, is preferred)
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users authorized to run the global workflow will be able to `dx get` all applets that comprise the global workflow
```

<!-- TODO mention URL when the UI supports global workflows -->

> Any usage of the above in a workflow (including in its tasks and sub-workflows) will produce a warning in the workflow's `description` metadata field, which can be viewed using:

Reviewer 2: Just to confirm, the warning will also be produced for docker images from external registries (public images)?

Author: Yes, this is already covered in this line
"- Docker images in external registries, or dynamically specified at runtime (these will be pulled at runtime)"

# Recompilation

Any significant WDL workflow is compiled into multiple DNAnexus applets and workflows. Naively, any modification to the WDL source would necessitate recompilation of all the constituent objects, which is expensive. To optimize this use case, all generated platform objects are checksumed. If a dx:object has not changed, it is not recompiled, and the existing version can be used. The checksum covers the WDL source code, the DNAnexus runtime specification, and any other attributes. There are two exceptions: the project name, and the folder. This allows moving WDL workflows in the folder hierarchy without recompilation.

# Publishing global workflows

<!-- TODO supported version pending release w/ APPS-989 -->
Publishing a dxCompiler WDL workflow as a global workflow is supported from dxCompiler >= `v2.8.0`

> and dxpy >= `v<supported version here>`

Author: Pending release of supported dxpy version, to go here. Otherwise, this is ready for early review. @emiloslavsky @jdidion

# Recompilation

Any significant WDL workflow is compiled into multiple DNAnexus applets and workflows. Naively, any modification to the WDL source would necessitate recompilation of all the constituent objects, which is expensive. To optimize this use case, all generated platform objects are checksumed. If a dx:object has not changed, it is not recompiled, and the existing version can be used. The checksum covers the WDL source code, the DNAnexus runtime specification, and any other attributes. There are two exceptions: the project name, and the folder. This allows moving WDL workflows in the folder hierarchy without recompilation.

# Publishing global workflows

A [global workflow](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/workflows/version-and-publish-workflows#about-workflows-and-global-workflows) is an executable that can be versioned and published to other users. Publishing global workflows may facilitate collaboration across multiple projects, compared with local, project-based workflows.

> Publishing a dxCompiler WDL workflow as a global workflow is supported from dxCompiler >= `v2.8.0` and dxpy >= `v0.319.0`. This is done in two steps. First, use `dxCompiler` to compile a workflow from WDL source to a local workflow in a project. Second, use `dx-toolkit` to publish the local workflow as a global workflow. Once the global workflow is published, you can add authorized users.

Author: Expected release of dxpy; to run test https://github.com/dnanexus/dxCompiler/pull/254 after release before merging this doc.

```
dx api globalworkflow-<workflow name> addTags '{"tags":["<tag 1>", "<tag 2>"]}'

dx api globalworkflow-<workflow name> removeTags '{"tags":["<tag 1>", "<tag 2>"]}'
```

Example: [adding and removing categories](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/global-workflows#api-method-globalworkflow-xxxx-yyyy-addcategories)
```
dx api globalworkflow-<workflow name> addCategories '{"categories":["<category 1>", "<category 2>"]}'

dx api globalworkflow-<workflow name> removeCategories '{"categories":["<category 1>", "<category 2>"]}'
```

Example: [updating title, summary, and/or developer notes](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/api/running-analyses/global-workflows#api-method-globalworkflow-xxxx-yyyy-update)
```
dx api globalworkflow-<workflow name> update '{"title":"<new title>", "summary":"<new summary>", "developerNotes":"<new developer notes>"}'
```

See [Limitations](#limitations) below for more details on which dependencies of the workflow will be automatically included in the global workflow.

> ## Recommendations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Global Workflows Recommendations
```

> Avoid storing credentials (passwords, keys, etc.) in the source code of the global workflow, as authorized users will have permission to download (via `dx get`) and view any applets and their data referenced in the global workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avoid storing credentials (passwords, keys, etc.) in the source code of the global workflow, as authorized users will have permission to download (via `dx get`) and view all dxCompiler-generated applets used in the global workflow.
```

> Use simple data types in inputs and outputs of global workflows for better usability on the platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use simple data types in inputs and outputs of global workflows to make it more intuitive for platform users to provide workflow inputs and examine workflow outputs via CLI and UI.
```

For better execution stability and to reduce dependence on third-party infrastructure, use Docker images stored on the platform rather than in external registries.

For better portability across projects where the workflow will be run, hard-coding instance types using the key `dx_instance_type` should be avoided for global workflows. You should specify runtime resources using numeric requirements for memory / disk / CPU and compile WDL workflows with the flag `-instanceTypeSelection dynamic`. This option ensures that instance types for jobs will always be selected at runtime, based on the actual instance types available in the runtime project. While this option can result in longer runtimes, it is better for portability because it will never attempt to start a job on an instance type that is not supported.

> For informational purposes, include a reference to a git repo commit containing the original source code in the `developerNotes` metadata field (see above example how to update developer notes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For informational purposes, include a reference to a git repo commit containing the original workflow source code in the `developerNotes` metadata field (see above example how to update developer notes).

Grant appropriate permissions to users authorized to run the global workflow the dependencies of the  global workflow that are not bundled with the global workflow.  These include credentials for external docker registries, DNAnexus apps called within the workflow, and other dependencies discussed in the [Limitations section](#global-workflows-limitations)
```

> ## Limitations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Global Workflows Limitations
```

> Publishing a dxCompiler workflow as a global workflow is currently only supported for WDL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Publishing a dxCompiler-generated workflow as a global workflow is currently only supported for WDL.
```

The global workflow will currently only support a single region (matching the region in which the original workflow was compiled).

Some dependencies of the original workflow will be automatically included in the global workflow, i.e. they will be cloned into the global workflow's resource container and authorized users of the global workflow will not require additional permissions. These include
- Applets and sub-workflows that were part of the original workflow
- Native applets included in the workflow via `dxni`
- Docker images that are stored as platform files

> Some dependencies of the original workflow will not be automatically included in the global workflow, i.e. the user may need additional permissions to access them. These include

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some dependencies of the original workflow will not be automatically included in the global workflow, so the user may need additional permissions to access and run the workflow. These include
```

> - Native apps included in the workflow via `dxni` (user needs permission to use the apps, which can be granted by running `dx add users <app> <user or org>` if you are a developer of the app)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Publicly inaccessible  DNAnexus apps included in the workflow via `dxni`.   User must have permission to run such  apps, which should be granted with `dx add users <app> <user or org>` by apps' developers.
```

# Recompilation

Any significant WDL workflow is compiled into multiple DNAnexus applets and workflows. Naively, any modification to the WDL source would necessitate recompilation of all the constituent objects, which is expensive. To optimize this use case, all generated platform objects are checksumed. If a dx:object has not changed, it is not recompiled, and the existing version can be used. The checksum covers the WDL source code, the DNAnexus runtime specification, and any other attributes. There are two exceptions: the project name, and the folder. This allows moving WDL workflows in the folder hierarchy without recompilation.

# Publishing global workflows

> A [global workflow](https://documentation.dnanexus.com/developer/workflows/version-and-publish-workflows#about-workflows-and-global-workflows) is an executable that can be versioned and published to other users. Publishing global workflows may facilitate collaboration across multiple projects, compared with local, project-based workflows.

Reviewer 2: This is a great intro, thanks!
